[AUDIO LOGO]
>> When you lucid dream, you can
fly up in the sky and you go,
whoo, Solar system now, or
you can bring earthquakes.
[EARTH RUMBLING]
You can manifest thousands
of people, civilizations.
[CROWD CHEERING]
You get to God mode.
And when you're in God mode,
you are a huge manifestor,
a magician, which feels
like you're really
at a high level of
lucidity, of mindfulness,
to realize that, wow,
everything in the dream is me.
[SOFT MUSIC]
>> Where ancient wisdom and
modern research converge,
Divine Science emerges.
What if you could wake up inside
your dreams, fully aware, fully
in control?
For centuries, Tibetan
monks and Indigenous shamans
have explored lucid
dreaming as a gateway
to self-discovery
and a transformation,
harnessing its power
for insight, healing,
and even spiritual growth.
But what exactly
is a lucid dream?
>> So a lucid dream is a
dream where you know that
you're dreaming as the
dream is happening.
So if you have ever had a
dream, where within the dream,
you have the experience of
going, oh, wow, I'm in a dream
right now, I can choose what
to do, that's a lucid dream.
So it's not just a
really vivid dream.
It's not a dream that
you remember really
well in the morning.
It's specifically a dream
where within the dream itself,
you have the reactivation of
self-reflective awareness,
allowing you to go, oh, wow,
I'm in a dream as I'm dreaming.
>> There are different
levels of lucidity.
I don't know if you've
had this before,
but you can have a drunkenness.
You kind of know
you're dreaming,
but you feel a bit drunk.
And you just still go
along with the flow,
but in the back of mind,
you know you're dreaming.
And if you've ever had a
nightmare where you've got,
oh, I've got to wake up,
you're actually lucid,
but you haven't got that
control of someone who's maybe
a bit further along the line.
Then you have the
next step, which
is, OK, I'm in the
deepest recess of my mind.
I could create worlds.
I could go through the
floor into the solar system.
So there's this wider awareness
of control beyond the confines
of the ordinary world.
And then the last one
is you've got God mode.
And that's when you can
collapse the dream state
and see what's beyond the dream,
where you can completely change
it into whatever you want
so that when you wake up,
that can affect what you
then bring into your life.
So that's the God mode.
So you can go from
drunk to God mode.
>> As lucidity deepens, dreamers
gain increasing control,
transforming their surroundings,
shaping entire worlds.
But what is happening in the
brain when this shift occurs?
Could the science
of neuroplasticity
reveal how lucid dreams
reshape not just the dream
world but the mind itself?
>> Neuroplasticity is the
ability of the brain to change
its structure according to
experience and learning.
So literally, the connections
between the neurons
change with experience.
The beautiful part
about lucid dreaming
is because the prefrontal
cortex comes online,
this brings
neuroplasticity online
and you can learn in the dream.
This has been shown with
skateboarding, extreme sports.
So lucid dreamers
will use this state
to practice things
that would be very
dangerous to try in real life
and get better and better at it.
And they're actually
rewiring their brain.
>> Neuroplasticity, the
easiest way I can explain it is
by folding this piece of
paper up several times.
OK, so now I unfold
the piece of paper.
And when I fold it
again, much quicker.
Why?
Two reasons.
Number one, the folds
are already there.
And number two, I've
already done it before.
So neuroplasticity
is about repeating
certain actions that
lead to neural grooves
in the network of our brain.
So the more you do
a certain activity
or the more you
think a certain way,
the deeper the grooves in the
neural network of your brain
become.
So it's like the
neurobiological basis of habit.
The more you do
something, the more neural
pathways you have
associated with that action.
How does that apply
to lucid dreaming?
In non-lucid dreams,
neuroplasticity is not engaged.
But once you become lucid
and the prefrontal cortex
reactivates, which is the
neurological basis of lucidity,
neuroplasticity
comes back online.
So this means that whatever you
do in your lucid dreams actually
lays down neural
pathways in the brain
in exactly the same way as it
would do in the waking state.
What does that mean?
It means you can learn
in your lucid dreams.
It means you can get better
at stuff in your lucid dreams.
And it means we can make
audacious statements like,
lucid dreaming allows you to
rewire your brain while you
sleep, and for that
audacious statement
to be scientifically true.
>> In a typical dream, the
prefrontal cortex is inactive,
leaving us to drift through
dreamscapes without questioning
them.
But in a lucid dream, this
part of the brain reactivates,
restoring agency, the ability
to recognize and control one's
actions within the dream.
But does the brain recognize
the difference between dreaming
and wakefulness?
>> As far as the brain is
concerned, you're awake.
Although the mind
knows that you're
dreaming, by its nature
of defining lucidity,
the brain thinks you're awake
because from the brain's
point of view, and this is an
interesting philosophical point,
wakefulness is not predicated
on having your eyes open
and walking around the daytime.
Wakefulness is predicated on
prefrontal cortex activation.
So once that part of
the brain is activated,
the brain thinks you're
awake and so will
start to lay down neural
pathways in exactly the same way
as if you were actually awake.
>> Because the brain
perceives lucid dreams
as if the experience were real,
practicing within this state can
have measurable effects on
behavior, skill development,
and even physical performance.
Studies suggest that rehearsing
actions in a lucid dream
strengthens neural pathways,
reinforcing habits,
and improving
real-world abilities.
>> The reason why lucid dreaming
is so profoundly beneficial
for new habits and new behaviors
is because you can practice
and rehearse things in
the dream state itself.
So let's say you're a bit
anxious with talking to guys
or talking to girls, and
you want to go on a date
or you want to try
and find a partner,
you could get into
the lucid dream
and you could say, my
ideal partner, come to me,
and you can practice
talking to them.
And then because your brain
thinks it's really happening,
it will build this neural
pathway in your brain.
So you'll be able to-- when
you come back into real life,
into the ordinary state,
it's like you've actually
done the work.
So then when you
enter a situation,
you're more likely to
have the confidence
and more likely to
have the capability
to have that conversation
and say those things
and have less anxiety
than you actually would
because you've practiced
in the dream state.
You can also train habits
in the lucid dream,
and it will have
a direct correlate
to improving and getting
better in the waking state.
They did this study,
where they did squats
in the lucid dream state.
And when they came out
of it in real life,
they got better at squats.
Not only psychologically,
but also their muscle mass
increased a little bit.
>> I was part of one of the
studies that they did with
martial artists.
We had to practice
a certain kick
sequence in the
waking state, then
go into the lucid dream state.
Oh, why?
I'm dreaming.
What did I want to do?
Oh, I wanted to practice
that kick sequence
that I'm doing for the study.
So you remember your
intention and then
you engage the kick sequence.
Then in the waking
state, they see,
did you get better,
worse, or stay the same?
In that study, 81.3%
of martial artists
reported getting better in
their waking state performance
after training in
the lucid dream.
>> And this is really
nice if you're an artist
or you're a creative.
You could say to
the dream state,
show me the most beautiful
piece of music I can create.
And your unconscious mind
will send back to you
whatever music that is.
You can say, show
me the best painting
that I have the
potential to create.
And then it shows you
this beautiful artwork.
So when we're in the lucid
dream and we rehearse
in these new behaviors, these
new habits, these new skills,
when we go into the waking
state, we're better at them.
Why?
Because when we're in the dream,
we are developing and plowing
those neural pathways that
help us create those behaviors.
And this directly correlates
with getting better at them
in the waking state.
>> Lucid dreaming is not only
a tool for skill development
and creativity.
Studies show that becoming
lucid within nightmares
allows individuals to reframe
distressing experiences,
reducing their emotional impact.
But could this ability
extend beyond nightmares?
Researchers are exploring
whether the healing that
takes place within a lucid dream
can reshape trauma responses
in waking life.
>> So we did two studies with
veterans and other folks with
PTSD to bring them into
a workshop setting.
And the first study
was a pilot study
with 50 people
experiencing chronic PTSD.
Through the week
with Charlie, they
learned about dreaming,
lucid dreaming,
and they developed a dream plan.
They were going to access
their subconscious mind
and transform their trauma.
>> Most people had no
experience of lucid dreaming,
although a few had.
And my job was to spend one week
teaching them how to lucid dream
and specifically how to use
their lucid dreams to face
their fears and to
transform their traumas.
So, for example, let's say I
become lucid in a recurring
nightmare that I'm back
in Iraq, like a lot
of the military veterans
I work with might have.
And in this recurring
nightmare, you become lucid.
And you know, oh, I'm
not really back in Iraq.
I'm just dreaming
I'm back in Iraq.
So because this is a dream,
I can change the ending.
So now I can change the ending
of the traumatic memory,
nightmare to a non-traumatic
ending, or in fact,
allow the nightmare to play
out traumatically but not
be traumatized by it because
you know that it's not real.
Now, if you do that, as far
as the brain is concerned,
you didn't dream about having
that experience in Iraq,
as far as the
brain is concerned,
last night, you
were back in Iraq
and you had a very
similar experience,
but this time, it
was non-traumatic.
Then the brain will
restore that new memory,
the non-traumatic one, in place
of the old traumatic memory.
And we believe that's the
biological underpinning
of how trauma integration
in lucid dreaming occurs.
>> By rewriting the nightmare
from a place of awareness,
the brain encodes the
new non-traumatic version
as reality, replacing the
old memory and reducing its
emotional charge.
Recent clinical studies
reveal the powerful impact
of this process
on PTSD recovery.
>> What we found
was within one week,
using lucid dreaming alone, the
vast majority of participants
had such a steep decrease in
their post-traumatic stress
disorder symptoms that they were
no longer classified as having
PTSD.
So by the end of the week,
85% of those 55 participants
were no longer classified
medically as having PTSD.
And one month later,
they were still
classified as
being free of PTSD.
>> During the
period of the study,
where we're measuring things,
we had these two groups
in parallel.
All of them come in with PTSD.
So then the active group
goes through the workshop
with Charlie Morley.
We measure, make them answer
questionnaires every morning.
They talk about their lucidity.
They talk about their
level of trauma.
They talk about
their nightmares.
I can tell you the results now.
They were wonderful.
The folks that went through
the workshop came out,
their PTSD symptoms
drastically reduced
below clinical threshold.
Their nightmare
experience was reduced.
And this time, we were
able to compare it
to a similar group that had gone
through the same period of time,
also got poked and
prodded by scientists.
And the difference
was still there.
This is going to be, I think,
an important and impactful study
in the medical field because
PTSD is very difficult to treat.
And this is a methodology
that is accessible to people.
You just got to dream.
>> Beyond trauma recovery, lucid
dreaming serves as a gateway
to deeper psychological healing.
This state allows
for the exploration
of unresolved emotions,
repressed memories,
and hidden aspects of the self,
offering a unique opportunity
for personal transformation.
>> You are in the most depth,
deepest part of your unconscious
mind, so it's super powerful to
incubate and plant seeds within
this state.
So you could say to the
dream space, inner child,
come to me now, and then
just see what happens.
Sometimes your
inner child runs up
and you can have a beautiful
healing moment with it,
or it might be more symbolic.
A tree might grow
out of the ground,
and on it might be all of the
snapshots of your childhood,
and you can watch them unfold.
Or you could go--
and this is more for
advanced practitioners,
but I love it,
the juiciest bits.
You could say, shadow,
come to me now.
So shadow is a coin
termed by Carl Jung, which
means anything we've
suppressed, denied,
or disowned about ourselves.
So it's very good
for healing trauma.
Something I tell
all of my friends
to do when they're first
starting out in lucid dreaming
is to call out to the dream.
You're awake, you're
lucid, you're aware.
Just call out, show
me what I need to see,
and then just see what happens.
Someone might come up to you.
There might be a huge rainstorm.
A tree might come up.
Something beautiful might
come into your existence.
But something that you need to
see in your life will happen,
and it can be super insightful.
>> Problem-solving is another
big benefit of lucid dreaming
because once you get lucid, you
gain access to this huge library
of knowledge that resides
in the unconscious mind.
If we think of this idea of
the iceberg of consciousness,
in the waking state,
we have access
to this top 10% of the iceberg,
the conscious mind that's
above the surface.
But the vast majority
of our mental capacity
is beneath the surface,
just like an iceberg.
Now, in a lucid dream,
you gain conscious access
to that 90% of the iceberg
that is beneath the surface.
So if you become lucid,
and in the lucid dream,
you call out something,
like what career path should
I take, or whatever the
kind of question is,
then you will very
often get an answer.
And the answer might
come in words printed
on the sky in the dream.
The answer might come--
people sometimes have
like a voice of God
that talks to them
in the lucid dream.
Other times, people will call
out their question to the dream
and then a dream
character will appear.
When people have
this experience,
they'll often say, oh, I think
it was a divine intervention.
>> For centuries,
various traditions,
including Tibetan Buddhism
and Mexican Toltec Shamanism,
have described lucid dreaming
as something that can be
cultivated.
>> So lucid dreaming in the
Buddhist tradition goes back
pretty much to the
time of Buddha himself,
more than 2,500 years ago, when
the teachings of Buddha move up
into the Himalayan regions,
especially the land of Tibet,
that lucid dreaming takes a
really fundamental role within
Buddhism.
Dream yoga, or milam naljor,
holds a really vital position
in the teachings.
And it said it's a
practice that can actually
allow us to reach full spiritual
enlightenment in our sleep.
The other spiritual
tradition in which
lucid dreaming plays
such a major role
is the Toltec Mexica tradition,
which is the shamanic Indigenous
tradition that existed in
Mexico, dating back to around a
thousand years ago.
There were certain
meditations, essentially,
self-hypnosis practices, use
of affirmations and mantras
that you do as
you're falling asleep
and before bed that allow
you to intentionally induce
lucid dreaming.
And the reason that we use lucid
dreaming in both the Toltec
Mexica tradition and the Tibetan
Buddhist tradition is the same.
It's not just as a use
for spiritual practice,
but it's actually as a
preparation for death and dying.
Both these traditions
say that when you die,
you may have the capacity to
recognize the death process.
And recognition of
the death process
can lead you to full spiritual
awakening at the point of death.
>> Yet science
long dismissed it,
believing awareness and
sleep could not coexist.
That changed in 1975,
when researchers first
measured controlled eye
movements in REM sleep.
This breakthrough paved the
way for further validation,
including Stephen LaBerge's
pioneering studies at Stanford
in the 1980s.
>> So they've got EEG showing
that the person is in REM sleep,
so it's unequivocal
the person is asleep.
And then because
you can do things
that you planned ahead of
time from the waking state,
they had planned that the lucid
dreamer, once awake, would send
signals to the researchers.
So Stephen LaBerge and
his group at Stanford
said, OK, when you
wake up in your dream,
and we verify this
by EEG, then I
want you to send these eye
signals to us that you're awake
in your dream.
And they'd have them do certain
tasks and signal back and forth.
So that was, I think, the first
really compelling neuroscience
evidence that lucid
dreaming is real.
It's verified.
>> So around 2009, '10 and '11,
there was a big rash of neural
studies into lucid dreaming,
where for the first time,
they got somebody to fall
asleep inside an fMRI scanner,
a functional magnetic resonance
imaging scanner, basically,
a brain scanner.
Now, when they got someone
to fall asleep in it
and that person was able
to have a lucid dream,
for the first time, they
had live images of the brain
at the moment
someone became lucid.
And it's very cool because
you can see this online.
You see these
images of the brain.
And the back part of the
brain is highly active
because that's where the
projector system for dreaming
is.
The occipital lobe, the
visual cortex, the brainstem,
all light up when you're in
normal non-lucid dreaming.
But the front part of the
brain was completely offline.
There were no colored lights
there because the person
was dreaming.
And when you dream,
the prefrontal cortex
is not engaged.
However, at a certain point, you
see the front part of the brain
light up like a Christmas tree,
while the back part of the brain
is still lit up.
And that was the moment,
for the first time ever,
they had recorded the neural
correlates of lucid dreaming.
And they saw these very specific
brain networks lighting up--
brain network associated with
sense of self, with agency,
and with, I am
having an experience.
So yes, we do have direct neural
correlates for lucid dreaming.
We can tell when someone's
having a lucid dream
and when they're not.
And there's no way to fake it.
>> Through specific techniques,
dreamers can train themselves
to recognize the dream
state, gain awareness,
and even shape their
experiences within it.
>> Some of the first techniques
that we can use are the four Ds.
The first D is dream planning.
Decide what you want to do in
your first or next lucid dream.
If you have a really
good reason why
you want to have a lucid
dream, that is the most
powerful technique there is.
But if you can think of
something really powerful,
something that's
really beneficial,
really life-changing,
then you can get lucid just
through the power of intention.
Maybe you want to become
lucid and meditate and do
your spiritual practice and have
a powerful spiritual experience
that awaits you within
the lucid dream.
But whatever it is,
decide what you want
to do before you become lucid.
The second D is dream recall.
>> As you go to sleep,
if you think this is you,
I want you to say at that
point when you're a bit drowsy,
next time I'm dreaming, I'll
remember that I'm dreaming.
Next time I'm dreaming, I'll
So you are planting that
suggestion in the hypnogogic,
this hypnotic state, before
you sleep, as a suggestion,
so that when you're dreaming,
it will tap you on the back
and be like, hey,
you're dreaming.
This is it.
Wake up.
So it's a suggestion, a
bit like an affirmation.
And then when you wake
up, keep a dream diary.
>> The third D, dream diaries.
The act of writing
down your dreams
helps to take the memory
of an unconscious process
and bring it consciously
down onto the page.
>> So you want to write this
down as soon as possible.
Don't move your body too much
because weirdly moving your body
can make you forget your dream.
So write down whatever it is.
>> Once you start to
keep the dream diary,
you can see these emerging
patterns of things that only
happen in your dreams.
And that's the fourth
D, dream signs.
A dream sign is any
person, thing, or activity
that can indicate to you that
you are definitely dreaming.
So dead relatives, living in
a place that you don't live,
being friends with
celebrities, talking animals.
If it can't happen
in real life, that
can only happen in your
dream, it's a dream sign.
By keeping the dream
diary, you start
to take note of
your dream signs.
And by taking note of them,
you're creating a trigger.
You're saying, oh,
my dead grandma only
appears in my dreams.
You're making these triggers,
these links between the dream
signs and the fact
that you are dreaming.
So then a week or so later,
when your dead grandma
comes into your dream again,
something is triggered.
This sense of, wait,
my dead grandma.
What is that?
Oh, she's one of my dream signs.
I'm dreaming.
And then you can become lucid.
There are literally dozens
of lucid dreaming techniques,
but the four Ds are a
good place to start.
- By recognizing
patterns in our dreams,
lucid dreamers develop the
ability to wake up inside them.
But beyond gaining control
of the dream state,
could this practice also
reshape our perception
of waking reality?
- I think that one of the most
profound benefits, potentially,
of lucid dreaming
is to influence
our attitude towards
reality itself.
So in a lucid dream,
this is like a practice
for realizing that we're
creating all this reality.
You get to experience this
shift in your consciousness to,
I was separate and now I'm
connected to everything.
The more you can
get used to that,
I believe the better you'll be
able to do it in waking life
and live lucidly.
- So I think a side effect of
having enough lucid dreams is
eventually, it starts to
flow into the waking state
and you start to have these
experiences of lucidity in life.
And maybe it's not that
you now have the ability
to fly like you do
in the lucid dream,
but you definitely
have the ability
to fly beyond your
own limitations.
>> You will access parts of
yourself you didn't even realize
that were there.
And when we illuminate those,
when we wake up to those,
there's this shift in our
mind, in consciousness,
and it ricochets, it bubbles
up to the waking state.
So then when we have a lot of
these dreams, when we wake up,
that potential for the desires,
the different parts of trauma we
can heal, it all comes over
into this waking state.
So we begin to wake up to
ourselves in this dream,
in this reality,
and that's what can
be very extraordinary
for someone
that has never even tapped into
the potential of themselves
before.
>> Lucid dreaming is
more than an exploration
of the unconscious.
It's a journey into the
depths of human potential.
By awakening within the
dream, we awaken to ourselves,
carrying newfound
awareness in waking life
and unlocking a deeper
understanding of who we truly
are.
Join us for more episodes
on Divine Science,
where we continue exploring the
crossroads of modern science
and ancient wisdom.
[ROUSING MUSIC]